feat:  init experience apis 0004 (#9)
logto-io/rfcs: draft/0004-experience-api.md

---
Start date: 2024-05-24
Author(s): [simeng-li]
Revision: 1
---

# Experience API

## 1. Overview

> Sign-in experience is the user authentication process in Logto. It encompasses both the user interface and a set of APIs. This specification introduces a new set of sign-in experience APIs that allow anonymous end-users to interact with Logto for identity verification and profile completion. These APIs are designed to offer developers a flexible and customizable way to create a user-friendly authentication experience.

Reviewer: align with others
```suggestion
Sign-in experience is the user authentication process in Logto. It encompasses both the user interface and a set of APIs. This specification introduces a new set of sign-in experience APIs that allow anonymous end-users to interact with Logto for identity verification and profile fulfillment. These APIs are designed to offer developers a flexible and customizable way to create a user-friendly authentication experience.
```

## 2. Motivation

At Logto, we offer various identification and verification methods for user authentication. The sign-in experience, however, can vary significantly based on different business needs. Developers often require a highly flexible and customizable sign-in process to meet their specific use cases.

> Currently, our interaction APIs in Logto are neither well-documented nor publicly available to developers. The only way to customize the sign-in experience is through the predefined sign-in experience settings. To address this, we are introducing a new set of Experience APIs that are developer-friendly and open to the public. These APIs will allow developers to create their own sign-in experiences using customizable UI interfaces, providing the flexibility and control they need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, our interaction APIs in Logto are neither well-documented nor publicly available to developers. The only way to customize the sign-in experience is through the predefined sign-in experience settings. To address this, we are introducing a new set of APIs that are developer-friendly and open to the public. These APIs will allow developers to create their own sign-in experiences using customizable UI interfaces, providing the flexibility and control they need.
```

## 3. Introduction

> ### 3.1 Terminology

Reviewer 2: Should we also add "grant" and "prompt"?

## 4. Definitions

### 4.1 Interaction event

Interaction event represent the user's current interaction purpose with Logto. Logto will use the interaction event to track the user's interaction progress and provide the corresponding interaction validation and actions.

The following are the types of interaction event supported by Logto:

- **Register**: A new user signs up for an account in Logto.
- **SignIn**: An existing user signs in to their account in Logto.
- **ForgotPassword**: A user forgets the password and initiates an account recovery process to reset their password.

### 4.2 Identifiers

The following are the types of identifiers supported by Logto that can be used to uniquely identify a user in the interaction:

- **Username**: A user's unique username.
- **Email**: A verified user's email address.
- **Phone**: A verified user's phone number.
- **Social identity**: A verified user identity data provided by a social identity provider.
- **SSO identity**: A verified user identity data provided by an enterprise SSO connector.

### 4.3 Verification record

> A verification record contains the necessary security information to verify a user's identity. One or more verification records can be created and verified via Experience API during the sign-in process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A verification record contains the necessary security information to verify a user's identity. One or more verification records can be created and verified via Experience API during the interaction.
```

#### 4.3.1 Identifier verification

Identifier verification can be used to verify the user's identity with a given identifier. A successful identifier verification will update the [interaction status](#52-interaction-status) from `Initiated` to `Identified`.

- **Password**: The user's password, which is the most common method for verifying identity. It can be used to verify the user's `username`, `email`, or `phone` identifier.
- **Verification code**: A one-time code sent to the user's email or phone number for identifier verification with a 10-minute expiration time. It can be used to verify the user's `email` or `phone` identifier.
- **Social identity**: An authenticated social identity used to directly identify and verify a user.
- **SSO identity**: An authenticated SSO identity used to directly identify and verify a user.

#### 4.3.2 Multi-factor authentication (MFA) verification

MFA is a security process that requires more than one verification factor to confirm a user's identity. It can be used as an additional security check during user interaction.

> Developers can enable MFA using Logto's sign-in experience settings. Once enabled, users will be prompted to provide additional MFA verification records during the interaction. MFA verifications can only be created and verified after the user is identified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers can enable MFA using Logto's sign-in experience settings. Once enabled, users will be prompted to provide additional MFA verification records during the interaction. MFA verifications can only be created and verified when the session status is `Identified`.
```

note: this update implies that `Verified` and `Profile fulfilled` are not applicable too. we can discuss about it.

The following are the MFA verification record types supported by Logto:

- **TOTP**: A time-based one-time code generated by a TOTP app for identity verification.

> - **WebAuthn**: A webAuthn (passkey) credential used to verify a user's identity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **WebAuthn**: A WebAuthn (passkey) credential used to verify a user's identity.
```

- **Backup code**: A set of backup codes used to verify a user's identity when other MFA verification methods are unavailable.

#### 4.3.3 New profile verification

For certain sensitive profile data, such as a new password or a verified email that can be used to identify the user, a verification record is required to ensure the ownership and validity of the data. Logto supports the following types of new profile data verification records:

- **New password**: This verification record is used to set up a new password for the user. It checks the new password against the password policy settings and, for existing users, against the old password to prevent reuse. For new identity registrations, a related identifier must be provided to verify the password-based identity availability against the existing user database.

> - **TOTP secret**: This verification record is used to set up a new TOTP MFA method for the user. It verifies the TOTP secret and generates a new TOTP code for the user to verify the TOTP MFA method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **TOTP secret**: This verification record is used to set up a new TOTP MFA method for the user. It verifies the TOTP secret and generates a new TOTP for the user to verify the TOTP MFA method.
```

can you update all "TOTP code" to "TOTP"? since TOTP already stands for "password"

- **WebAuthn registration**: This verification record is used to set up a new WebAuthn MFA method for the user. It generates a new WebAuthn registration options object for the user to verify the WebAuthn MFA method.

### 4.4 User profile

The user profile consists of the user data that will be stored in the Logto database. Any new profile data provided by the user in an interaction will be saved once the interaction is submitted.
Developers can use Logto sign-in experience settings to define the required profile data and MFA settings that need to be collected from the user for submitting the interaction.

#### 4.4.1 User identifier

> [User identifiers](#42-identifiers) can be configured as a requirement for the profile fulfillment stage. The user must provide the necessary identifiers to identify themselves during the interaction.

Reviewer 3: When we are talking about "profile fulfillment stage", does readers know other stages and the order of all stages in a sign-in/sign-up flow? If not, we should better provide a flow chart to show this.

Author: Remove the `profile fulfillment stage` word, as technically, readers do need to understand the concept here. 
Also, the interaction status was introduced in the following Section 5.

- Except for the `username` identifier, all other identifiers must be verified via a verification record before they can be used to identify the user and stored in the user profile.

> #### 4.4.3 Password

Reviewer 4: missing 4.4.2

Author: Typo updated

The user's password can be used as a primary verification method to verify the user's identity during the interaction. The password can be set, updated, based on different interaction events:

- The `password` can be set during a register interaction event.
- The `password` can be set and updated during a forgot password interaction event.
- The `password` can be set during the sign-in interaction event only if the user has not set a password before.

> #### 4.4.3 MFA settings

Reviewer: this section does not seem relevant to the user profile, since it's related to tenant-level settings. maybe use "4.5" and update the description?

Reviewer: my bad - i misunderstood it

In order to meet the MFA requirement, the user must provide necessary MFA settings to Logto. The following MFA settings can be created and attached to the user during the interaction:

- **TOTP secret**: A TOTP secret used to generate time-based one-time codes for MFA verification. A TOTP code verification record is required to verify the TOTP secret.

> - **WebAuthn registration**: A WebAuthn credential used to verify a user's identity. A `WebAuthn` verification record is required to verify the WebAuthn registration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **WebAuthn registration**: A WebAuthn credential used to verify a user's identity. A WebAuthn verification record is required to verify the WebAuthn registration.
```

- **Backup codes**: A set of Logto generated one-time backup codes that can be used to verify a user's identity when other MFA verification methods are unavailable. The backup codes can be used as an alternative MFA verification method during the interaction.

> - **skipMFA**: A flag to skip the MFA setup process if the MFA settings are optional in the sign-in experience settings.

Reviewer 3: better using sentence case and align with other config items?

## 5. Interaction

Logto uses interactions to track the user's progress and status during the sign-in experience. All the interaction data will be stored in the short-lived authentication session and submitted to Logto once the user completes the interaction.

### 5.1 Interaction data

- `userId` (`string`): The unique ID of the user for the current interaction. Only available once the user is identified by at least one verified identifier.
- `interactionEvent` (`enum`): The [interaction event](#41-interaction-event) for the current interaction.
- `verificationRecords` (`array`): The [verification record](#43-verification-record) list created during the current interaction.

> - `profile` (`object`): The user provided [profile data](#44-user-profile) in the current interaction that needs to be updated.

Reviewer: may look better:

```suggestion
- `userId` (string): The unique ID of the user for the current interaction. Only available once the user is identified by at least one verified identifier.
- `interactionEvent` (enum): The [interaction event](#41-interaction-event) for the current interaction.
- `verificationRecords` (array): The [verification record](#43-verification-record) list created during the current interaction.
- `profile` (object): The user provided [profile data](#44-user-profile) in the current interaction that needs to be updated.
```

- **Profile fulfilled**: The user has provided all the necessary profile data and MFA settings. It is computed based on the `profile` in the interaction and the sign-in experience settings. The interaction is considered as `Profile fulfilled` only if the user is verified and all the necessary profile data and MFA settings are provided. Any newly added profile requirements in the sign-in experience settings will revert the status back to `Verified` until the new requirements are met.

#### 5.2.1 Sign-in interaction

The sign-in interaction may vary based on the sign-in experience settings. Here's how interaction status changes during a sign-in interaction:

1. Initiated: The interaction is initiated by the user.

   - `userId`: NULL. The user has not been identified yet.
   - `interactionEvent`: OPTIONAL. The interaction event may or may not be specified.
   - `verificationRecords`: OPTIONAL. Verification records may be created but not verified yet.
   - `profile`: NULL. The user cannot provide profile data until they are identified and verified.

2. Identified: The user is identified by at least one verified identifier.

>    - `userId`: REQUIRED. The userId of the user for the current interaction.

Reviewer: can you update all "userId" (without code block) to "user ID"?

```suggestion
   - `userId`: REQUIRED. The user ID of the user for the current interaction.
```

   - `interactionEvent`: REQUIRED. The `SignIn` interaction event has been specified.
   - `verificationRecords`: REQUIRED.
     - The identifier verification records are created and verified.
     - All the necessary MFA verification records are created and verified.
   - `profile`: OPTIONAL. The user can provide profile data during the interaction after they are verified.

4. Profile fulfilled: The user has provided all the necessary profile data and MFA settings during the interaction.

   - `userId`: REQUIRED. The userId of the user for the current interaction.
   - `interactionEvent`: REQUIRED. The `SignIn` interaction event has been specified.
   - `verificationRecords`: REQUIRED.
     - The identifier verification records are created and verified.
     - All necessary MFA verification records are created and verified.
     - Any newly added user identifiers in the profile have corresponding verification records created and verified.
     - Any newly added MFA settings in the profile have corresponding verification records created and verified.
   - `profile`: REQUIRED. The user has provided all the necessary profile data during the interaction.

> 5. Submitted: The user has submitted the interaction to Logto for authentication. The user profile and MFA settings will be updated in the user database. Continue to the consent and authorization process.

Reviewer: maybe "Authenticated"?

4. Profile fulfilled: The user has provided all the necessary profile data and MFA settings during the interaction.

   - `userId`: REQUIRED. The new userId of the user for the current interaction.
   - `interactionEvent`: REQUIRED. The `Register` interaction event has been specified.
   - `verificationRecords`: OPTIONAL.
     - REQUIRED if the user has provided a verified identifier. The identifier verification records are created and verified.
     - REQUIRED Any newly added MFA settings in the profile have corresponding verification records created and verified.
   - `profile`: REQUIRED. The user has provided all the necessary profile data and MFA settings during the interaction.

5. Submitted: The user has submitted the interaction to Logto for authentication. The user profile and MFA settings will be updated in the user database. Continue to the consent and authorization process.

#### 5.2.3 Forgot password event interaction status

- Only `email` and `phone` identifiers can be used to identify the user for the forgot password interaction in Logto.

> - The user must provide a valid `verification code` verification record to verify the identifier during the interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The user must provide a valid verification code verification record to verify the identifier during the interaction.
```

- All other types of identifiers and verification records are ignored during the forgot password interaction.

> - Only `password` can be set in the user's profile during the forgot password interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Only password can be set in the user's profile during the forgot password interaction.
```

### 7.2 Alternatives

Considering no extra new features or customization options are added, instead of introducing a new set of APIs, we could consider providing comprehensive documentation for the existing internal interaction APIs. This approach would minimize the risk of breaking changes to the sign-in experience. However, even with detailed documentation, developers may still find it challenging to understand and effectively use these internal interaction APIs.

Moreover, continuing to use our existing APIs and interaction design will likely lead to a rapidly increasing maintenance effort as we keep introducing new features and flows to our system. Eventually, we will reach a point where refactoring and migrating our existing sign-in experience logic will be unavoidable. Therefore, the best time to implement these changes is now.

## 8.Future possibilities

> ### 8.1.User profile management

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 8.1 User profile management
```

The user profile data can be extended to support custom user profile fields during the sign-in experience. Developers can define and set required custom profile fields for the user during the interaction. This will allow developers to collect additional user data and customize the user profile based on their specific use cases.

### 8.4 Experience API SDK

Developing a client-side SDK that simplifies the integration of the Experience API into the front-end application. The SDK can provide a set of pre-built components and functions that handle the interaction flow, user profile management, and MFA settings. This will help developers quickly integrate the Experience API into their applications and build a customized sign-in experience with minimal effort.

### 8.5 Standalone verification APIs

Currently, a verification record is created directly via the Experience API. We may provide standalone verification APIs to create and verify these verification records without an interaction context. This will allow developers to customize the verification process and use it in a separate flow, e.g., building a GitHub-like `sudo` mode.

## Appendix A. Experience API

> 
> The Experience API are a set of APIs that allow end-users to interact with the Logto to complete the user sign-in experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: not a blocker: describe why we are using `POST` for all APIs

> All experience API  can be called from the experience app to interact with Logto for user identity verification and profile fulfillment. The APIs are designed to be stateful and require an interaction context to track the user's progress and status during the sign-in experience. All the APIs are using the `POST` method with action-based endpoints to represent the user's interaction purpose with Logto.

Reviewer 2: Extra whitespace

#### Backup codes

- `PUT /api/experience/verification/backup-code/verify`

  Verify the Backup Code MFA method with the provided backup code.

  - A verified backup code verification record will be created in the interaction if the backup code is verified successfully.

  Request body:

  | Field      | Type   | Description           | Required |
  | ---------- | ------ | --------------------- | -------- |
  | backupCode | string | The backup code value | Yes      |

#### New password

- `POST /api/experience/verification/new-password`

  Create a new password verification record for the user to set up a new password during the sign-in experience.

  - A new password verification record will be created in the interaction.
  - The new password verification will verify the password against the password policy settings.
  - For existing users profile fulfillment, the old password will be verified against the new password to prevent reuse.
  - For new identity registrations, a related identifier must be provided to verify the password-based identity's availability against the existing user database.

>   - For new identity registrations, `email` or `phone` identifier must be verified before the password verification. A `verificationId` is required to verify the identifier.`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - For new identity registrations, `email` or `phone` identifier must be verified before the password verification. A `verificationId` is required to verify the identifier.
```

  Request body:

  | Field      | Type       | Description            | Required |
  | ---------- | ---------- | ---------------------- | -------- |
  | password   | string     | The user's password.   | Yes      |

>   | identifier | Identifier | The user's identifier. | NO       |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  | identifier | Identifier | The user's identifier. | No       |
```

| Field              | Type             | Description                                                                                                    | Required |
| ------------------ | ---------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| interactionEvent   | InteractionEvent | The interaction event for the current interaction.                                                             | Yes      |
| verificationId     | string           | The verification record id that can be used to identify the user.                                              | Yes      |
| linkSocialIdentity | boolean          | Link the new social identity to a existing user account with same email. Only used in the social sign-in flow. | No       |

#### Sign in

- The `interactionEvent` must be specified as `SignIn` to initiate a sign-in interaction.
- The `verificationId` is required to identify the user with the given identifier.
- The `userId` will be set in the interaction if the user is successfully identified.
- Once the user is identified, the interaction status will be changed to `Identified`.

> - A social identity with a verified email can be linked to an existing user account with the same email by setting the `linkSocialIdentity` flag to `true`.

Author: Hold till we have a better solution.

  - All precondition checks will be performed before submitting the interaction. The interaction will be rejected if any of the checks fail.
  - The interaction must be `Identified`, `Verified`, and `Profile fulfilled` to be submitted successfully.
  - Once the interaction is submitted, the new user profile and MFA settings will be updated in the user database.

- `GET /api/experience/interaction-status`

  The `interaction-status` API is used to retrieve the current status of the user's interaction. The user can use this API to check the progress and missing requirements of the interaction.

  - `interactionEvent`: The interaction event for the current interaction.
  - `userId`: The userId of the user for the current interaction. Only available once the user is identified by at least one verified identifier.
  - `verificationRecordStatus`: The verification record list created during the current interaction. Only verification type, status, and verificationId are returned.
  - `profileKeys`: The user provided profile keys in the current interaction that will be updated in the user database.
  - `status`: The current status of the interaction.

> ## Appendix B. Example

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Appendix B. Examples
```

### 1. Sign-in with username and password

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant C as Client
    participant L as Logto

    C->>L: POST /api/experience/verification/password
    L-->>C: 200 OK
    C->>L: POST /api/experience/identification
    L-->>C: 200 OK
    C->>L: POST /api/experience/submit
```

> ### 2. Sign-in with username and password and fulfill email

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### 2. Sign-in with username/password and fulfill email
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant C as Client
    participant L as Logto
    participant S as Social Identity Provider

    C->>L: POST /api/experience/verification/social/:connectorId/authorization-url
    L-->>C: 200 OK
    C->>S: GET /authorize?redirectUrl=...
    S-->>C: 302 Redirect
    C->>L: POST /api/experience/verification/social/:connectorId/authenticate
    L-->>C: 200 OK
    C->>L: POST /api/experience/identification
    L-->>C: 200 OK
    C->>L: POST /api/experience/submit
```

### 10. Sign-in with social identity and identity not found, register directly

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant C as Client
    participant L as Logto
    participant S as Social Identity Provider

    C->>L: POST /api/experience/verification/social/:connectorId/authorization-url
    L-->>C: 200 OK
    C->>S: GET /authorize?redirectUrl=...
    S-->>C: 302 Redirect
    C->>L: POST /api/experience/verification/social/:connectorId/authenticate
    L-->>C: 200 OK
    C->>L: POST /api/experience/identification
    L-->>C: 404 Not Found
    C->>L: POST /api/experience/identification
    L-->>C: 201 Created
    C->>L: POST /api/experience/submit
```

> ### 11. Sign-in with social identity and identity not found, link to existing account with same verified email

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### 11. Sign-in with social identity and identity not found, link to existing account with the same verified email
```
